Always stick to a single trading plan
The first among the most important trading rules is to stick to a single trading plan. A trading plan must fit your own personality and risk tolerance. It is very easy today to test your trading plan through backtesting before risking real money. Once you have your own trading plan, just stick to it and trade according to your plan. A trading plan must be your anchor in decision making.

Developing a fact-based methodology
It is a most important trading rule to develop a fact-based trading methodology. Your methodology must base on quantifiable facts and not opinions. Avoid being driven by emotions and hopes is the key here. Doug Gregory very aptly says, “Trade what’s happening…not what you think is gonna happen.”

The right mindset and the right attitude
Trader’s psychology is very important in financial trading. You need to develop the right mindset and right attitude for financial trading. Being flexible and going with the flow of the market indicates the right mindset and right attitude. On the other hand, being stubborn, egoistic, and driven by emotions are the worst indicators.

Risk management
Risk management is crucial in financial trading. It is important not to lose trading capital. It doesn’t mean you won’t experience a losing trade. All traders experience losing trades. Proper risk management and avoid taking unnecessary risks enables you to protect and preserve your capital. Choose only those trades that have a favorable risk/reward.

Keep your knowledge fresh and develop skills
Financial markets are never stable and change continuously. That means you need to keep your knowledge fresh and develop your trading skills as well. That is how you can keep up with the pace of the financial markets. That is only possible when you become a student of the market. It is important to note that learning the ins and outs of the market is an ongoing and lifelong process. So, be an informed trader and do your own research and analysis.

Focus and be an expert in a single strategy at a time
Focusing on a single strategy and being an expert in it is also among the most important trading rules. It is better to be a master of a single trader rather than being a jack of all trades.

Avoid overtrading
Overtrading means you have more than five positions at a time which is an ideal way. Overtrading leads you to lose control and make hasty decisions when the market changes. Always remember that you cannot beat the market.

Always have an exit strategy
An exit strategy should always be a part of your trading plan. You must have a plan to exit the winning or losing position. Staying too much on trade might lead you to big losses. Obsession is a negative attitude that always brings unfavorable consequences. So, always have an exit strategy to get out of a position.

Move with the market
It is an important rule of trading to flow with the market instead of going against it. Understand that market is too strong for you to beat. Just flow with it, be patient, and it will reward you as it has several other successful traders.

Always count on stop-loss
Stop-losses are very crucial in taking some stress out of your trading as you already know that you will lose X amount. Even winning without stop-loss is still a bad trading practice. Stop-losses ensure that you have limited risks and losses.

Take a bold decision when the trading plan isn’t working
It is also among the most important trading rules to know when you have to stop trading temporarily. When it becomes clear that your trading plan isn’t effective as it seemed, it is time to stop trading. Stay calm and unemotional. It is not the end of your trading career. It is just a break to reevaluate your trading plan, make some necessary changes, or even go for a new trading plan.

Trade with a bigger picture, trade with a perspective
Trading isn’t about a single trade being successful or unsuccessful or a single good or bad trade. Financial trading is an arena where you will face many challenges. So, focus on the bigger picture. Don’t let yourself be derailed by a single bad trade. Similarly, don’t let yourself be overconfident because of just one good trade. Always remember that cumulative profit matters.

Bottom line
Financial trading is a complex game and it demands discipline and organization. Understanding each of the above trading rules and following them will make you disciplined and organized. Always remember that these are all the most important trading rules that can help traders to be successful. In the arena of financial markets, those who follow the rules increase for themselves the odds of success.











What are emotions?
Emotions are biological states related to the nervous system as a result of neurophysiological changes tied to thoughts, feelings, behavioural responses, and a level of happiness and unhappiness. It is a conscious mental reaction such as agitation, joy, fear, hate, anger, love, etc.

How to manage your emotions when trading?
As far as trading is concerned, you are your worst enemy. Most often than not, your failure would be as a result of your own wrong decisions. The market is not the one treating you wrongly and you can’t put the blame on imaginary concepts such as luck. And to be candid, you will never be a successful trader if you tie your achievement and success to luck.
There is this feeling when your emotions are rising, the adrenalin is pumping so fast and you may or may not be making the right decision in your career. The result can be different if only you can find more time to think it through but in some cases, time is of essence and hence, one would need to make a prompt decision.
In market trading, emotions can switch from really high feeling to a low feeling in matter of seconds. This makes it impossible for a number of traders to be able to last the pressure existing in the trading market. The degree of emotion and the weight of the consequence is just so high for one to handle when things gets out of hand. For traders who are able to manage their emotions well enough, they end up thriving.

Prevention is better than cure
Try to avoid all possible ways in which emotions can take to damage your performance. Below are some tips which would be of great benefit.
Have a very good trading plan
Just place the trade and walk away
Always use well-proven strategies
It is better to take a break after about three consecutive win
Taking charge of your emotions
Controlling of emotions is easier for some than others. There are various means for controlling emotions, ways that will enable you to benefit from the highs and the adrenalin. And also avoiding jeopardizing with your long-term mental state.
It is important to note that feeling pressure is not necessarily always a bad thing. Although, sometimes it can prompt certain decision which can change whatever is leading to stress. But to a large extent, stress is not needed.

The difference between stress and pressure
If we believe that traders do not benefit from stress both in the short and long-term, then how can we try to manage these feelings in our daily life?
With pressure, there are two types: internal and external.
The external pressure can mean your workload, the goals you are expected to accomplish, and the high competition existing among your colleagues at the work place. External pressures are real, tangible and defines our day-to-day feelings.
As for the internal pressures, they are less tangible. They include feelings of inefficiency, frustration and concern that you are not leveling up with the standards others have of you.
They are both valid and can lead to intense emotions inside and outside of work. These emotions can affect your decision making capability.


Making the right corrections
The key to effectively managing your reactions both internally and externally is preparation. Some will support this while others will oppose it. However, for you to be able to make an effective change, you will need to make the right decision and commitment.

With the help of proper planning and some mapped out responses, it should come very easily to react in suitable and healthy ways.

It helps to look for some certain relaxation techniques that will assist you to think more clearly when stressed up. An example include deep breathing exercises. This will definitely require you to set aside some time but it sure would be worth the while in the end.

You will also need to listen and be sensitive to your body type. If your body is not up for the game, don’t try to push it. Just sit back and take your time to re-organize yourself before attacking the work again. Pushing things makes you run a risk of feeling really bad if things should go out of plan.

Something else to consider is to keep the size of your trade in check. Minimizing the size will translate to less profit but it would in turn minimize the risk of you getting affected so emotionally. The reduction does not have to be so drastic. It can just be enough to enable you feel fully in control when the need arises. Also, try not to take risks outside your comfort zones.

Pressure is not equal to stress
Do not make the mistake of thinking pressure and stress are one of the same. A small amount of pressure, for instance a lingering deadline, can be a positive thing and may energizes us to get the work done. Take into consideration the Inverted U theory developed by Psychologists Robert Yerkes and John Dodson.


This theory illustrates an upside-down U-shaped graph with boredom and low pressure at one end of the U and high stress and anxiety at the other end. The axis below denotes pressure while the vertical axis denotes performance. The top arc of the U is the one that denotes the best performance of a person, somewhere in between minimal and maximal pressure.

Stress occurs as a result of too much pressure which fails to lead to a boost in output and performance. To a certain degree you have little control over the external pressure applied on you but you can help to determine your reaction. When you are feeling stressed up, apply these techniques:

Accept the fact that you do not have power over some aspects of your work life and that is fine
Be firm, without showing aggression while expressing your views and needs.
Look out for your body. When it comes to both physical and mental health, exercise are really great
Go into mindfulness and meditations.
Set boundaries, if you are not up for a particular task, don’t push or force it.
Sleep is imperative. Do not undermine the effect sleep can have on your emotional well-being.
Avoid much intake of alcohol and stay clear of using drugs.
Create some sort of life outside work environment. It could be spending with time with family or friends.
According to Victor Sperandeo famously regarded as “Trader Vic” says

The key to trading success is emotional discipline.
If intelligence were to be the key, then there would be a lot more people making money from trading.

This statement is completely true and it is an integral concept in Forex trading psychology. There are numerous people who are intelligent but still run at a loss in Forex. This is because emotions like fear, greed and happiness affects their decision making right after they had just made a profit trade.

Should you ever wonder why about 90% of Forex traders lose money and quit trading forever, it is as a result of lack of ability to handle emotions and not having the full knowledge of trading psychology. If you have been able to properly manage and keep in check your emotions, then you can successfully regard yourself as a well-seasoned and professional trader.


Control your Emotions: Key to Trading Success
They are various kind of emotions. In market trading, emotions can switch from really high feeling to a low feeling in matter of seconds.When emotions are too high, they can take over and traders can stop trading at their best.Understanding and mastering your emotions...

Manage Greed and Fear: Unlock your trading
Fear and greed are two strong emotions in humans (and traders).They are strong engines of economic movements.Treat your trading like a business, trade a plan and don't deviate due to emotions.There are several rules you can follow to reduce the risk you face greed and...


Losses are inevitable in trading and no trader not even the most successful traders can make 100% winning trades. That is why risk management is paramount to keep manage risks carefully. 

Trading is a very risky game that requires you to be disciplined in each aspect.
If you want to remain in the game for a very long period of time, you need your capital intact.
Traders often neglect money management and risk management.
Only after incurring huge losses and facing frustrations, traders turn to money and risk management. You can cut that learning curve short and avoid all the inevitable consequences by only turning to risk management.
There are multiple risk management techniques such as the 1-percent rule etc. that you can choose to keep your losses minimum, keep your capital intact, and remain in the game for the long term. 


Risk management trading techniques involve placing strategies to tackle adverse trading conditions. When you limit your trading positions, your overall remains minimum even if an adverse market move or series of losses do happen. It also saves your trading funds so that you can recover incurred losses through profitable trades in the near future. 


Risk management trading works on a simple principle. It measures the extent of your potential losses in comparison to profit potential on each new trade. Traders who don’t exercise proper risk management are prone to making huge losses for too long. 


Why risk management is must in trading? 
Professional traders are well aware of the importance of risk handling in trading. They know that even the tried and tested strategies can leave them vulnerable to risks because of:

Series of consecutive losses
Occasional huge losses as a result of major events such as news event
Market conditions are ever-changing and you cannot be 100% sure that a strategy that was successful in the past will continue to be successful in the future
Therefore, risk management is a must in trading. Without proper risk handling techniques, events like the above lead you to:

Loss of a major portion of your capital
Incur losses that cannot be recovered given your overall financial position 
The forced exit of a trading position at the wrong time because of lack of liquid funds to cover margin
An extended period of time just to recover incurred losses and restore the level of your trading funds
What are the most impactful risk management techniques? 
Risk management must be an indispensable part of your overall trading strategy. Without it, you cannot even expect to protect your capital. If you cannot protect your trading capital, you will not be able to take profits and remain in the game over the long run. 

There are various different techniques that prove instrumental in risk management. The following are the most common techniques you can employ to manage your risk.

1. Risk/reward ratio 

Measuring the risk/reward ratio is one of the best risk management techniques. Once you identify an entry signal, decide your stop-loss level first and then profit order. Measure the risk/reward ratio after identifying reasonable price levels for your trade. Just ignore the trade if the risk/reward ratio doesn’t match your requirements. Moreover, it isn’t a good idea to enlarge the take profit order or shorten your stop-loss level for a higher risk/reward ratio. Remember that profit is always uncertain. The risk is the only factor that you can control. Thus, manipulated risk/reward ratio is detrimental to your trade success. 

2. Position sizing
Dynamic position sizing is another risk management technique that professional traders employ. Trading is a game that relies heavily on chance. You might have observed that different trade setups and strategies give different outcomes because of different win rates and risk/reward ratios. That implies that you need to vary your position size on each setup and strategy. If the trade setup has a low win rate, reduce the size of your position and vice versa. 

3. Diversification

Diversification is the most basic risk handling technique. If you rely on a single instrument in order to make profits, you expose yourself to excessive risk. Conversely, when you carefully diversify your portfolio, you protect yourself from big swings in a single instrument. 

4. Stop-losses
The use of stop-loss to protect your trades from sudden changes in the market is an old but effective risk management technique. It is an extremely useful technique that helps you avoid total destruction when prices turn against you. Stop-losses are calculated in advance to find out the maximum loss you are willing to incur on a single trade if prices move against you. It helps you avoid losing more money. That means stop-losses are a good shield for traders to protect their capital in a rapidly changing market.

5. One-percent risk rule
1-percent risk rule is another risk management technique that pros follow. According to the 1% risk rule, traders should never risk more than 1% of their capital in a single trade. When you risk less, your losses are also less than you can afford. This risk management technique suits all those traders who have low trade capital. Traders with high trading capital often risk 2% or higher because they can afford it. Thus, the 1% rule is a good technique for keeping your losses under control. If you don’t follow the 1-percent risk rule, it means you are exposing yourself to incurring big losses and substantial loss of capital.


Final thoughts
Trading is a very risky game that requires you to be disciplined in each aspect. Risk management is a key aspect of trading and it demands utmost discipline. If you want to remain in the game for a very long period of time, you need your capital intact. If you don’t pay attention to risk management, you incur losses and your capital begins to evaporate. 

Unfortunately, traders often neglect money management and risk management. Although these are crucial aspects but never get enough attention. Only after incurring huge losses and facing frustrations, traders turn to money and risk management. You can cut that learning curve short and avoid all the inevitable consequences by only turning to risk management. There are multiple techniques such as the 1-percent rule etc. that you can choose to keep your losses minimum, keep your capital intact, and remain in the game for the long term. 







How to calculate the risk/reward ratio?
A professional and astute trader always aims to know and manage the risk related to his portfolio. On the other hand, an amateur and immature trader may be content without it. As we have already discussed the R/R ratio helps traders to assess the expected return and the associated risk of a trade. However, calculation of an R/R ratio is not rocket science and everyone can calculate it.

For example, if a trader buys EUR/USD at 1.3000 and places his stop-loss and take profit at 1.2950 and 1.3150 respectively, what does that mean? That means the trader is risking 50 pips for a potential profit of 150 pips. So, the R/R ratio will be (50/150) 1:3. This ratio suggests that the trader wants to risk 50 points for a potential reward of 150 pips. To calculate the risk/reward ratio in the forex market, traders use pips as a measure from entry point till stop-loss and target. The following are the steps to calculate the R/R ratio.

Choose a market to trade after conducting significant research 
Pick entry and exit points and stop-loss 
Calculate the R/R ratio using the formula given below
If the calculated ratio doesn’t suit, traders may lower the entry point to get acceptable values
The formula of the risk/reward ratio calculation is:

R/R ratio = ABSOLUTE VALUE (ENTRY VALUE – STOP-LOSS VALUE) / ABSOLUTE VALUE (ENTRY VALUE – TARGET VALUE)

What makes a good R/R ratio?
Let us suppose that there are 100 trades and all have an R/R ratio of 1. That means there will be 50 losers and 50 winners because of the winning rate of 50%. Here the loss per trade equals the profit per trade, hence, giving us a breakeven. 


Now, let us take another example to further elaborate the point. Suppose an R/R ratio of 2 then the average winning trade will be twice its average loss. In this example, traders will be more profitable even with a winning rate of 50% because winning trades will compensate for the losing trades. 

It is clear from the above examples that an R/R ratio of more than 1 has more chances of attaining profits as compared to traders using an R/R ratio of 1. We can surmise that a high R/R ratio means that traders must not have to be right every time to gain profit. Therefore, a higher risk/reward ratio ensures high gains. However, enforcing a very large risk/reward ratio is also not recommended. The risk/reward ratio should not be as high that stop-loss gets too much closer to your entry price than taking profit price. If it happens, the normal volatility can easily get you stopped out. Still, traders must choose the risk/reward ratio according to their own trading strategy. It depends on how much they are willing to risk.


What does the risk/reward ratio tell traders? 

The risk/reward ratio has achieved significant importance in financial trading. It helps investors to calculate and analyze the risk associated with trades. R/R ratio is significant because it helps to achieve the ratio of profit to loss or reward to risk. Traders utilize stop-loss to avoid losses and try to manage their portfolios with risk/reward focus. The R/R ratio highlights how much risk is bearable for the target gain. It is interesting to note that every trader may set a R/R ratio according to his/her own particular trading strategy, skills, and personal traits.

What are the important points to remember?
Traders must remember the following key points regarding the R/R ratio.

A low risk/reward ratio cannot tell traders about everything they should know about trade. Traders must know about the chances of achieving those targets. 
Traders must carefully analyze the market conditions surrounding the trade before entering a trade. Having a certain R/R ratio in mind without analyzing the market can lead traders to place stop-loss and profit targets entirely on the basis of entry point rather than based on the value of the stock. 
Traders must work on a reasonable trading plan to exploit the real wonders of the risk/reward. A reasonable trading plan is based on acceptable market conditions, entry points of trade, and the placement of stop-loss and profit targets according to the market conditions. 
The risk/reward ratio is not an ultimate measure that traders should use in isolation. It is advisable to use the R/R ratio in conjunction with other risk management ratios such as the win/loss ratio, the breakeven percentage, etc. 







Why do you need a trading plan?
The answer to this question is simple. As we have discussed earlier that planning is essential to do even simple tasks let alone trading. Trading without a trading plan brings failure even you have loads of market experience. Trading of financial instruments is just like any other business with an organized structure that lets it grow and flourish. 

Moreover, you have to have some plans to tackle sudden market shifts such as market crashes or market corrections. A well-balanced trading plan enables you to remain in line with your trade objectives and goals. It also allows you to make well-informed decisions instead of making hasty ones. That also means that a well-prepared trading plan also brings confidence in and ousts emotions. 

11 steps to create the best trading plan
1. Choose between technical analytical approach and fundamental analytical approach
Your first step should always be to choose between two types of analytical approaches, technical and fundamental. It helps you to narrow down your focus on a few handfuls of scenarios you are comfortable with. It also enables you to identify trade setups and then look for trading opportunities based on those trade setups.

2. Knowledge and skill assessment
Now it is time to rethink your analytical knowledge and skills. Have you the required level of knowledge and skills to do right in live trading? Do you have the confidence to follow the leads given by analysis? That is an important step because you can’t risk your money in live trading unless and until you have enough knowledge and skills to do technical or fundamental analysis. Without proper knowledge and skills, the odds are against you. You will be prone to make costly mistakes.

3. Find suitable trade setups

Once you are confident that you have the required level of knowledge and skills to analyze the market, you can look for suitable trade setups. Trade setups are at the very core of your trading plan. They lead to the trades with the highest probabilities. However, it is crucial to select trade setups that suit you. For example, will you trade the breakout, wait for a pullback to happen, or combine both after viewing a consolidation pattern?

4. Assess your capacity to tolerate risks
Risk tolerance assessment is very crucial when creating your trading plan. It is crucial because it impacts overall trading strategy, risk management, and various other trading activities. In general, traders can be classified into two main groups on the basis of risk tolerance. The first group is risk-averse traders who are reluctant to take risks. They usually invest in less risky instruments. The other group is risk-tolerant who take risks. They opt for a more aggressive approach and aim for high rewards, unlike counterparts who always try to keep risk under control and are content with small profits.


You can also set a risk/reward ratio and realistic profit targets during your risk assessment process. What should be the least acceptable risk/reward ratio? What should be the minimum profit? For example, most of the traders prefer trades with profit potential greater than risks at least three times. It also helps you manage your risks effectively. 

5. Limit your focus on a single market
It is always recommended to limit your focus on a single market after assessing your risk tolerance capacity. All financial markets are different and mastering all of them is next to impossible. Therefore, it is always important to limit your focus on a single market and understand all the nuances associated with it. Traders even limit their focus on a few timeframes on a single market to understand every bit of it. However, you can move on to the next market once you fully understand the first one.

6. Think about your trading time frames
Timeframes or holding periods depend on what type of trader you are. If you are more inclined to short-term trading, your holding period will be a few working hours. Scalping is a short-term trading style with a timeframe of a few minutes to lock in very small profits. Swing trading‘s holding period is a few hours up to a few days. Long-term trading involves timeframes ranging between a few days to years.


7. Keep a trading journal and regular look back on it
Keeping a trade journey and regularly looking back on it is very important for successful trading. You have to incorporate it into your trading plan. A trading journal is a document that keeps records of all your trades and how you traded. It documents trading position size, type of traded instrument, trade entry and exit points, trade output, and any other worthwhile field. A trade journal helps you improve your trading skills and also helps spot mistakes that lead to losses. 

It is also imperative to regularly look back on your trading journal. A retrospective look at your trade journal lets you get the most out of it. You can look at your recent trades and observe how they went. You need to make an objective evaluation of your trading performance. For example, you can look back on trades ending in losses and try to find out what went wrong. You can identify mistakes that have incurred losses and try to avoid the same mistakes in the future. Similarly, you can also analyze successful trades and know why and how they were successful. Trading gurus always do that. They keep excellent records to retrospect and learn.

8. Fully understand your trading strategy
A trading strategy is a set of predefined rules that you follow to buy and sell in the financial markets. Knowing all ins and outs of your trading strategy is the key to a successful trading plan. There is no such thing as a “perfect trading strategy.” Every trading strategy has strengths and weaknesses. Therefore, you need to understand your strategy well.

You can also have two strategies but only try a second strategy once you become the master of the first. Having two or more strategies is advised because some strategies work well in trending markets while others in ranging markets. You can have two different strategies for both types of markets. Similarly, you can also have two different strategies for short-term and long-term trading. 


9. Control your emotions
Controlling and managing emotions is the key to successful trading. When your feelings begin to cloud your thinking, reasoning, and judgments, things go wrong. Be like machines as they don’t have to feel good or bad to enter or exit a trade. They strictly follow the set of rules. They enter the trade as soon as conditions are met and they exit quickly when stop-losses get hit.

10. Prepare for trading: Set entry and exit rules
Setting major and minor levels of support and resistance is always important irrespective of your trading system and program. You have to set crystal clear entry and exit points when your set levels are breached. Enter a trade by considering probabilities not emotions. Think and act like artificial intelligence and computers respectively. Computers enter the trade when conditions are met and when the stop-loss gets hit, they exit. That should be your way of trading.

Furthermore, remember that paying attention to exit points is as crucial as entry points. When to exit position is equally important as is when to buy. Most of the traders get trapped in a blind alley because they don’t determine exit points. They cannot be able to sell because they don’t want to incur losses. You have to avoid being clueless and take help from setting exit points. 

Moreover, you also need to understand that losses are also part of the game. Trading isn’t always about winning. Sometimes you win and sometimes you lose. If your stop-losses get hit, don’t overreact. Keep your emotions at bay and try to limit your losses. That is what professional and successful traders do. The summary of the debate is to know your exit points even before entering a trade. You can set two stop-losses if you want. One such trading plan example can be – you set a stop-loss as a protective shield when the situation is adverse. The second is – each trade must also have a profit target as well. Once you achieve your profit target, you can sell a portion of your position and readjust your stop-loss on the rest of your position at a breakeven point. That is how you can balance your trade.


11. Plan how to face and deal with adversities
Stock market corrections and crashes are harsh but realities. Stock markets are also risky and a minor mistake can cost a lot of money. That means, almost every trader has to face the dreaded downfall and drawdown. Therefore, it is also important to jot down some rules to follow during adverse market conditions. Those rules should be a part of your trading plan. An effective trading plan example here can be to take a break and evaluate what went or is going wrong. Figure it out and take a fresh start. 


Final thoughts
The key to successful trading is to have a proper trading plan. Your odds of success substantially increase when you are fully prepared, organized, and disciplined. Trading is a risky game that requires an effective trading plan in practice to achieve success. Most beginners neglect the importance of a trading plan. They even mix a trading plan with the trading system. It is crucial to note that the trading system is a part of your trading plan. It defines your trade entries and exits. On the other hand, a trading plan is your overall way of doing trading which includes other important parts like risk management. 

Once you have a trading plan, you should strictly follow your trading plan. You need to spare some time to retrospect on the previous events and analyze recent trades. Keeping a journal and constantly looking back on it helps you in this regard. Moreover, it is a good idea to review your trading plan itself every now and then. Don’t hesitate to make changes in your trading plan if there is room for improvement. Remember, there is nothing absolute in trading. You should always be ready to tweak a bit and improvise. 





“Patience is a virtue” according to an ancient adage. It is something beyond the truth. Patience helps us realize our goals, make us proactive and less reactive, and lead us to mental strength where we aren’t prone to make rash, impulsive, and bad decisions. Those who sit a spell without reacting when encountering uncertainty and negative situations always achieve big. The reason is, they get back to their right frame of mind before making any decisions. Others who don’t have patience are prone to lose their rational sense and make mistakes meet failures in life and profession. That is the power of patience. 


Discipline is also a virtue. Discipline is a bridge between your goals and your achievements. If you cannot do what your goals demand you to do, you cannot achieve your goals. Discipline makes you do even those things you don’t want to do but still you do to achieve success. That means discipline is a crucial strategy to be a top professional. Moreover, discipline is something that has refining powers to turn your talent into your ability. Thus, you cannot underestimate the power of discipline in every field of life including your professional journey. 


What are patience and discipline? 
You can find various definitions of patience. Patience isn’t the ability of someone to wait, rather it is an extraordinary quality of someone to keep the best attitude while waiting. No matter how you define patience, it is an extraordinary quality that can take you to excellence in every sphere of life. Bill Gates says that patience is a key element of success and Kao Yang says that patience is the road to wisdom. 

Discipline means to train yourself to follow rules or a certain code of behavior to taste the fruit of success. If you remain disciplined in any sort of activity, irrespective of its difficulties and complications, you eventually achieve a favorable outcome. However, you need to behave in a very controlled manner and follow particular rules, regulations, and standards. 

Patience and discipline in trading
Patience and discipline combine to make a force that can face all sorts of trials and tribulations. Trading endeavor isn’t an exception. It requires you to be patient and disciplined. In fact, two things define your trading success, your patience, and discipline during your trading journey. 

Understanding the power of discipline and patience in trading completely changes the trajectory of your trading performance. They make you a perfect and flawless trader to achieve your goals faster. Patience and discipline are two precious pearls that all successful traders never let go of. All the successful traders all across the globe always emphasize patience and discipline. What does that suggest? That suggests no other profession requires more wisdom, patience, and discipline than the trading profession. Trading is a profession where competitions are always at their peak and you are up against the sharpest minds in the world. There are traders who are always ready to pounce on a small mistake you make. Therefore, you always need to have patience and discipline in trading. 

Although the cheetah is the fastest animal in the world and can catch any animal on the plains, it will wait until it is absolutely sure it can catch its prey. It may hide in the bush for a week, waiting for just the right moment. It will wait for a baby antelope, and not just any baby antelope, but preferably one that is also sick or lame; only then, when there is no chance it can lose its prey, does it attack. That, to me, is the epitome of professional trading

Mark Weinstein

Why do you need to exercise discipline and patience in trading? 

Who are the most successful traders in the world? The obvious answer is those who are consistently making a profit over a long period of time. What made them so successful? It’s their most important traits, discipline, and patience. The ability to make profits month in month out demands the highest level of patience and discipline. If you have a well-tried and tested trading strategy, even then you cannot make profits if you don’t have patience and discipline with you. If you don’t have the patience and discipline to follow the rules of the best trading strategies, you cannot achieve success. That is why you need to exercise discipline and patience in trading. 

How do patience and discipline work in trading? 
Patience and discipline in trading are the biggest rewarding virtues. Your trading strategy, diligence, and research inform you when to enter and exit trades. But, letting the price touch the boundaries set by your trading strategy takes some time. There you need to be patient and disciplined. Therefore, you need to be patient and disciplined in the following key moments. 

Entry point

When waiting for the price to reach your entry point level, entering a trade in a rush proves costly. You need to be patient here and also practice discipline in trading. Don’t violate the rules set by your trading strategy. Just follow the predetermined rules and be patient until the price reaches your entry point level. That is what patience and discipline trading requires. 

Searching for a suitable trade
The market is full of trading opportunities and it is never difficult to find tradable opportunities. However, it is important to hunt those opportunities that are according to your trading strategy. Patience trading requires you to wait for good entry points while making sure that you have defined your exit along with stop-loss level. Once you enter a trade according to your trading strategy, discipline trading requires you to follow all the protocols of your strategy and keep your emotions at bay. 

Waiting for exits to take profit
Once you enter a trade according to your trading strategy, the time for patience and discipline in trading comes. Now, you need a lot of patience to give your position enough time to develop. Most of the time it happens that traders exit their position because of fear of loss. They don’t even wait with patience when their well-thought-out plan is in place. Remember that losses are also part of the game. You cannot always win. Trust in your trading strategy, trading plan, patience, and discipline are crucial. All successful traders have absolute faith in their trading strategy. Even if it incurs losses, they collect all the relevant information to analyze the situation. They discover what was right and what went wrong. Successful traders’ patience and discipline in trading eventually leads them to improvements and finally to make profits month in month out.


When you encounter a situation where the price of your stock barely moves despite being patient and disciplined, re-analyze your analysis of the trade. See what has changed and decided accordingly. If the stock doesn’t fulfill the criteria, sell your position immediately. If a stock meets all your requirements, hold your position patiently because the stock will reach the target position soon. The reward for your patience and discipline in trading will be so sweet. It happens and it will continue to happen. That is what trading is and that is what patience and discipline in trading all about. All the trading situations are teachers that teach you that discipline and patience in trading are difficult but reward big and reward sweetly. 

When you encounter various trials, big or small, be full of joy. They’re opportunities to learn patience.

Scott Curran
